How are you?
I'm-
Nice to have you with us this afternoon.
Thank you very much. It's an honor to present on behalf of Auckland Council.
Thank you, Chair, and to your committee.
Auckland Council
supports the
bill's intention to remove barriers to economic
growth.
However, it must be balanced against the harm done by alcohol.
We should not grow our economy by making life worse for vulnerable
Aucklanders. You will see our submission covers elements of the
bill that we support and oppose.
I will not repeat those here. Instead, I want to speak briefly to an element only
briefly covered in our submission, the role of the local alcohol
policy. As you all know, this council has spent
a lot of money to try and get this local
alcohol policy enacted on behalf of our communities
who have been crying out to us for the protections offered under
this local alcohol policy.
We also
want to speak to
how
there is the need to update the legislation regarding the local alcohol
policy. It's well over a decade old, and while it has regular
updates, it still fails to reflect some elements of the current world.
In particular, it does not allow the local alcohol policy
to regulate rapid delivery services.
These services deliver food and groceries and provide a useful service for many
people. However, they also sometimes deliver alcohol, which
creates two problems. Firstly, because they are not covered by local
alcohol policies, it creates a loophole and an unfair advantage
for any company that chooses to exploit this loophole
over those who comply with the spirit of our policy.
Secondly, responsibilities in this area are muddled, with the provider of
the alcohol often being responsible with minimal
obligations on the deliverer.
This is unfair and impractical. For instance, a retailer is not
allowed to sell alcohol to a person who is obviously
intoxicated. This obligation should extend to the deliverer of the
alcohol, who is much better placed to make this kind of assessment.
This is one example. I urge the committee to reconsider how
to modernize the legislation to ensure there is proper
regulation of rapid delivery of alcohol.
Our other concern is around the restrictions
limiting who can object to one or two
kilometers. We support five kilometers, but actually we would
support further than that because there are so many that
are affected by
license applications, especially off license, that may not
live one or two kilometers but feel the effects of
alcohol harm. And to be honest, those that do live
close in some situations, especially in communities where apathy is
an issue,
will not be familiar with objection or submission processes.
And
we actually
owe a lot to those lobby groups and community organizations,
social services that speak up for our communities and
object, but they may not be located within one or two kilometers
of that particular outlet.
I'm happy to take any questions and appreciate this opportunity to share our
submission, and I also want to thank the council staff and KAAD
and all the communities that work to try and
decrease alcohol harm that is affecting us.
In particular, Auckland, 3 billion a year is the cost.
Yeah, good. Hey, thank you, Councillor.
All right, members,
got any questions?
Again, a small one, but this one around the
hairdressers,
you obviously don't support that.
Is that
just because you don't think we should due to safety and enforcement concerns?
Your enforcement concerns are that you'd need to have
people going out to enforce it. Is that where your problems are?
I-
And you think you would have to-
Um
... in reality?
I would hope that we wouldn't have to enforce, because our enforcement team is
already stretched.
I would hope that we wouldn't have to go and enforce at hairdressers.
I think there'd probably need to be some real strict
rules around
the alcohol provided at a hairdresser.
I believe it's one
cut, one-
One
... one person.
Yeah, one serving or something. Yeah.
Yeah. The real worry for us is the off
licenses in our-
Yeah
... income communities where
people, it's just a normal day of, part of life to go and pick up a
box of Cody's and go to the park and drink.
That's what we-
Yeah
... the crux of our
concern is in the alcohol harm.
Well, I think many of us share that view, too, Josephine.
All right. Hey, thank you for coming on and talking to us this afternoon.
That's really good.
We're coming to the end of the submissions, so that's why we're having, peppering
you with questions. Otherwise, we would have been.
I totally understand. Thank you for the-
No, no problem at all. Right. Now, we're going
to,
hopefully, Kevin Mapson from Pena
Ricard.
Yep. Can you hear me okay, guys?
We can, but we can't quite see you yet.
Right. Why is that?
Yeah. Maybe you
don't want to be seen or you do?
I would love to be seen, but I'm conscious of your time as
well.Um.
Anyway, are you-
I work in, work in Teams, not in video, so I'm not sure
what's going on here.
Oh, this is Parliament.
I've got it. I've got it.
There I am.
There you go.
All right, I'll crack into it. So good afternoon. Thanks for having me.
I'm the managing director for Pernod Ricard Pacific, so I look after our
New Zealand and our Australian businesses across the Tasman.
Um, we're the country's leading spirits in
champagne, so brands you'll be familiar with, um, Absolute,
Jameson, Chivas, um, and The Glenlivet.
And we work closely with wholesalers, retailers, hospitality operators every
day, and representing our business, but also representing their
interests as well. Um, we support the bill.
New Zealand needs a system that is responsible, practical,
and workable. Uh, right now it's too complex, too slow,
too inconsistent, uh, and that doesn't help communities, and it doesn't
help good operators either. Uh, responsibility is
fundamental. Without responsible consumption, our industry simply does not
exist. Uh, it's that simple, and we want people to enjoy our, our
products, but in a responsible way.
And the reality is most operators are responsible and most New
Zealanders drink responsibly. Um, but we do do harm as an
industry, um, and we fully acknowledge that, and we have a role to play, and we
take that, um, seriously. So just a little bit on that.
We don't sit on the sidelines globally.
We partner with governments,
communities, uh, industry, because harm reduction only works if
we all work together, um, to make sure we address it, because it's a
targeted and education approach that we think works best.
Um, give you some examples. We support the, uh, Tomorrow Project funding of
the education, Life Education Trust, which runs a program called Smashed, which you
may have heard of, which is around educating, uh, young people in the community,
like my two teenage daughters.
Um, and we invest internally in training, education.
One of them is 16 today, by the way. Um, we set clear standards and
expectations-
Congratulations
Yeah. Wish me luck. Um, and expectations, and we actively,
uh, promote moderation. So a simple thing is a drink more water
campaign, and that's just about making sure that you moderate your alcohol
intake there. It's not glamorous, but it is actually effective.
Um, and just to, uh, touch on, uh, the human side of things,
people want to connect. Hospitality, pubs, bars, restaurants play a real
role in bringing things, uh, people together.
And the world we're seeing at the moment, I think that's more important, uh, than
ever, and that helps combat loneliness and builds community.
And I see it with my, my daughters, making sure they've got those, uh, good social
connections is important, and our industry plays a role in that, um, as well.
It's hard to measure, um, but it's a very real, um,
uh, impact that, um, upside that we provide.
So what's not working today? Well, the system, um, licensing takes too long.
So I mentioned I look after the Australian, uh, our business in Australia.
And there, the worst case for licensing I've heard there, of there, is three
months. Uh, the worst case in New Zealand is 18 months.
Um, so there's a big difference between the countries. Um, so it takes too long.
Decisions lack consistency, and good operators face
unnecessary, um, risks. And that whole uncertainty
just slows everything down and impacts, uh, community and business owners
alike.
So we, uh, support the direction of the bill, uh, particularly the focus on
clarity and simplification. Um, viewpoints for us,
objections should come from local, uh, communities.
And so I think the, uh, prospect with the 500 meters in built up areas
or a kilometer in country areas, that's fair.
Um, process must be balanced. And in
fairness, if you raise an objection, the applicant should have a clear right
to respond, and that's basic common sense.
And importantly, the business shouldn't lose its license because the rules, uh,
change at a later date. So longstanding, well-run operators shouldn't get caught
out because a new sensitive site appears, uh, nearby.
And we need, uh, certainty for those that are doing the right thing.
So in summary, support the bill. Um, it's a step toward a system that's
simpler, fairer, and more consistent, and one that still reinforces
responsible consumptions. And I'll take any questions you might have.
Liam, can I start out? Um, you've said in your
proposal reinstate cross-examination is the ability
to test evidence is important. So presumably, um,
the commissioners, if you go to a hearing,
uh, presumably that's the role of the commissioners, isn't it?
And or are you suggesting that the,
the license holder of that was a case,
his or her lawyers could, should be able to cross-examine anyone
making an application against the renewal of the license in that case?
It, it, it's the latter. And quite often in those
situations, it'll be around seeking clarity or
something will be, um, uh, put forward, um, but there's no
opportunity for the applicant to be able to say, "Well, the actual situation
is this," or, "The actual situation, um, is that." And so relying on
the commissioner, I don't think is necessarily the best way to
represent fairness.
They are pretty qualified though, aren't they?
Sorry? Um-
Presumably. Well, they should be, shouldn't they?
Ah.
Oh, okay.
No comment.
Okay. Well, that was a gross assumption, wasn't it? Right.
Kararingi Cato has got a question for you.
Thanks for your submission, Kevin.
Um, I was just wondering, y- you support the bill overall.
Um, are there any parts of the bill that you, um,
don't support or are concerned with or think could do with an
amendment?
Um, the, the main one is around the ability that, um, for the
applicant to, to challengeAnd that if
something's been
put forward in terms of any concerns around
the
licensing-
Oh,
something's happened there.
What's happened there?
I don't know. I'm gone. I'm back.
Oh, you're back. Keep going, Sven.
Yeah, so that was the main one, just the ability to make sure
that if someone puts something forward, that the applicant has an opportunity
to defend their business or the situation, or provide
additional facts that may or may not be known. That's the only real thing here.
I think what we would say is
speeding things up, but being consistent nationally is
really important.
So your comment about 18 months being the longest,
versus three months in Australia.
Would you
literally just put a timeframe in the bill if you were to try and
remove some of that and just force the
commissioners, the licensed commissioners, whatever, to act more quickly?
Or how would you deal with that?
I'm not sure that I would say mandate a timeframe.
I think it's the nature of the process that anyone, anywhere can complain
about any license. It can be in Invercargill and put a complaint
forward
for something that's happening in Auckland, and it's simply-
Oh, that's a bad example. We've had that rebutted.
Yeah. Well, okay. Well, okay, Tauranga then. But wherever.
But
that's the essence of it. And I guess when I think about our Australian
business, we don't have these sorts of complaints.
I don't have the trade talking to me around
conversations around concerns around licensing, licensing length
of time to get renewals. It's simply not a conversation.
But for whatever reason in New Zealand it is.
So yes, you could put a timeframe in there, but I suspect
what this bill is trying to do is to simplify the process that will get the
result, which is speeding things up.
But still making sure that people are
responsible consumption of alcohol and serving properly.
All right. Doesn't look like we've got any more questions.
Good luck with your daughters, and hopefully they don't get too used to champagne.
No, but the boyfriend's coming over tonight, so I'm a bit nervous about that.
All right. Thanks for your time, everyone. Have a nice weekend.
All right. Fantastic.
Bye-bye.
Right. Now we've got Paul Reddage, Woolworths New Zealand.
Hi, Mr. Chair. It's James Ratcliffe.
I'm here with Paul as well, so you've got just both of us on the screen.
Double trouble. Okay. Let's go.
Double trouble. Thank you. Thank you very much for the compliment
and also for the opportunity to appear in front of you all today.
So my name's James Ratcliffe. I'm the general counsel here at Woolworths New
Zealand, and I have with me my colleague Paul Reddage, who's our national
alcohol responsibility manager, so our subject matter in this area.
And today we plan to cover briefly
some of our views on the key elements of the bill and then allow plenty of time at
the end for questions, which I'm sure there'll be some.
Can I just start by saying that we understand the responsibility that comes with
selling alcohol, and we support the current regulatory regime and the bill.
Our written submissions provide some thoughts on the bill as drafted, but also
where we believe there could be some improvements more broadly.
I'd like to be clear that we're not advocating or asking for any relaxation
in the rules around the supply and sale of alcohol.
But we do support the government's intent of reducing complexity, and we believe
that things could operate
with much greater efficiency.
I think if you've read our submission, we have included some examples of specific
instances where we've experienced inefficiencies and where we think there could
be improvement. But I'll now hand over to Paul to talk
to our main points and then questions afterwards. Thanks.
Yes, good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to submit to the committee
today.
Very briefly, we just wanted to cover one aspect, which is the role of public
objectors.
Reporting agencies and objectors play a critical and crucial role in
the regulation of the sale and supply of alcohol and providing scrutiny to alcohol
licensing decisions. We understand, and having
listened today, the committee has heard a number of objectors say that they are
concerned that the bill will create barriers to public participation, and we
think this is unfounded.
Since the 2023 Community Participation Amendment bill,
Woolworths has seen a significant rise in the number of public health groups, like
Communities Against Alcohol-Related Harm, using the application and the renewal
process for individual licenses to advance broader
policy positions rather than those issues relating specifically
to the relevant store or the community or the application.
We are supportive of these issues being raised and discussed, but we believe this
should be part of the broader discussion.
If changes are required, those should be made at a national level rather than
a license-by-license one.
The bill does not remove the ability for genuine local concerns to be heard.
Rather, it helps restore a balance to the process that has become increasingly
difficult, complex, and costly for responsible licensees to
navigate.
The bill refines the scope of the objections and ensures they remain
focused and relevant and efficient.
We think this is critical that objections are connected to the premises, the
community, and the evidence rather than being abused as a
vehicle to advance broader policy positions on
alcohol more generally or from objectors who don't live around the area.
Woolworths strongly supports the bill of proposed amendments requiring objectors to
certify that they reside or have an office
in the place
more generally from objectors who don't live around the premises.
Woolworths also strongly supports the proposed amendment enabling applicants to
respond to objections. Happy to take any questions.
Okay. Well, we'll go to Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb first.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Just curious around
your-rapid delivery
framework. And I guess my concern is
that
Woolworths is
looking to basically increase sales of alcohol and, in
fact, is promoting alcohol deliveries sort of
fast, real fast.
What's the go there? Why are you promoting alcohol on rapid
delivery?
Well, we're not promoting alcohol.
We're promoting a service that enables somebody to do a
full shop-
Well, guess what?
... and get it delivered.
So you guys operate Milk Run, right?
That's correct.
Yeah. And so I don't know if you can see this, but I've got an advertisement here,
and that advertisement is two women drinking,
and it says, "Alcohol delivered fast, real
fast."
Well, that's-
Would you say that's a responsible way to
promote delivery of alcohol?
Well, I think with respect, sir, you have to look at the process that was gone
through in order to set that
service up. And that service took two and a half years to
establish because-
Oh, no, no. Go
... we wanted to ensure that the delivery partner that we were using was
the appropriate delivery partner and had the effective systems and
controls in place to ensure-
Okay. Well, let's talk-
... that the outcome was met
... let's talk about the systems and controls.
That was a message that popped up on my social media
at quarter to 10:00 at night when the Christchurch
local alcohol plan has all bottle stores
in the area closing at 9:00 PM. Would you call that
being a responsible community member in telling people
at quarter to 10:00 at night that they can get alcohol delivered fast, real
fast?
Well, clearly there's an issue with the geolocating because they can't get it if
the requirements of the LAP are 9:00.
Well, yeah, okay.
I guess my question is this. We've got a problem with rapid
delivery. If what you're saying, and I think Milk Run talks about delivery
within 40 minutes, right? Or something like that.
If you're promoting essentially alcohol
within 40 minutes at 10:00 at night, and you
come to the Select Committee and say, "We're simply providing a responsible
service," and I think your words in your submission are a prudent and careful
manner. How can that be true?
I think, sir, we can certainly consistent with the approach we take
to all of those issues around the responsible supply and sale of alcohol.
We'll take on board that feedback, and definitely we can adjust the
way we do our advertising. So I think definitely your concern
is noted around both the content of the advertisement and also the timing of
the advertisement. So definitely we can take that away and
make any adjustments that we need to.
So definitely take on board that feedback. Thank you.
Okay. We'll go to Todd Stevenson.
Hi. Two quick questions, gentlemen.
One, would you be comfortable with the requirements around
alcohol delivery
services being put into this bill?
Because at the moment, there are actually no checks and balances.
This was going to require
identification and not to
hand over alcohol to intoxicated people.
Would that fit with what you're doing?
That's certainly our current policy.
And if you
look at our submission, sir, we've actually suggested that the
controls around rapid delivery are strengthened.
Yeah.
Certainly our experience is that our Milk Run policies are more robust and
comprehensive than-
Oh, so you're doing more than-
... does require
... is required. Okay. Thank you. My other quick question was, we actually just had
on
a gentleman who was talking about the difference between Australia and New Zealand
in getting an alcohol license. For some of your supermarkets, what's the kind of
longest time period it's taken to get a license in place?
Two years, 364 days, sir.
Wow.
They've literally been issued on the very last day of the
very last minute before they are due to expire.
So I listened to Mr. Mapson, and
he certainly wasn't overstating the situation as it sits with us.
Thank you.
Okay, so that tailors in, you've got a number of
submissions in terms of the wording of the legislation.
The first one is around surrogate.
And I presume you think that if there's a restriction
around who can make submissions on re licensing or
whatever, you think it's necessary to make sure surrogates are not used as
a vehicle for them. That's what I presume what your wording's about?
Yes, sir. It's purely about ensuring that the person who is
objecting, it is their objection, and they live in
the area. And we've found 300-
Are you seeing examples of that now, or you're anticipating
that this is likely to be the way of what will happen?
No, we've seen multiple examples of it, sir, right up and down the country.
Okay.
There are multiple examples I can provide where surrogates
have
been named as the objector when the objection's not theirs at all.
Okay. Next thing, 3.6, you're talking about
responding to police and a medical officer of health.
But again, presumably, it's the act that at the
moment, I presume it's under the act
or even under the bill, you don't think it's sufficiently clear that
the holder, license holder, or the proposed
applicant, sorry, the applicant can rebut both the police and the
medical? Is it it's specifically excluded?
It's specifically excluded, sir.
If the police or the licensing inspector or the medical officer of
health objects to an application for a liquor license,
a hearing is required unless they withdraw that
report
prior to the hearing.
So automatically you go to a hearing?
It's automatic.
Okay. Right
Unless you can convince those reporting agencies to withdraw.
And 3.7 is about proportionality.
I presume this is your argument. It's about proportionality.
If you're going to impose conditions as a tribunal or whatever, a
commissioner, you're trying to bring some proportionality around those conditions.
Is that right?
Yes, sir. The case law from ALRA is very, very clear that
discretionary conditions rely on evidence as they relate to that
particular premises. But what we see up and down the country, and we see with
ourselves a lot is objectors or surrogate objectors
simply request conditions to go on our licenses.
Licensing inspectors, police
have formed a view. For example,
you're not allowed to sell any 500ml cans of beer for less than $6 is a
common one. Unless you agree to that condition, we
are going to a hearing, and when you ask to see the evidence that
supports that condition or the evidence of harm or simply just a survey
that indicates that those particular products are harmful in that community,
we're simply told, "Go to a hearing." So we have to go to the hearing
and then convince the DLC that those conditions aren't
necessary, which is a significant-
And have you been able to convince them that it isn't necessary?
Yes, we have, sir. But what we see is a lot of smaller providers
who simply,
for lack of a better term, roll over on the condition and accept the condition
because going to a hearing before a DLC is incredibly expensive.
Right. Okay. Now, 4.6, I asked Kevin about
the
caliber, the qualification of license of the
HERA commissioners. I presume, and he
refused to answer the question. Well, he
chose not to answer the question.
4.6, are you saying there's evidence that a lot of the
commissioners are not well-qualified?
Is that what your assertion is?
I think what we're saying, sir, is we're trying to raise the
standards so everyone is equally well-qualified rather than
singling out DLCs that are not well-qualified.
Certainly, the training that DLCs get
varies greatly up and down the country, and we think
that there's a more consistent approach to that training would be
helpful to the particular addresses.
Who does the training? Is it
done by council or there's no common training across the--
and so therefore, no consistency across New Zealand?
Is that-
No
...
Wouldn't one of the issues rather than write this is actually make sure
that if you want to be a commissioner, you have to go through a
standard
process of getting training and therefore out of that learn what the case
law is that applies across the country, not just in one
jurisdiction?
That's effectively what we're suggesting, sir.
But in terms of that being the case right now,
no. There is no standardized training.
The
training that is available is
somewhat ad hoc and is
obviously more detailed in some of the larger
cities and slightly more sparse in some of the other ones.
So we're just saying this will elevate everyone up to a
consistent standard, sir.
And if you were to centralize it, if I can use that word, and have one
standardized training, if you want to be a commissioner you have to do this, like
most things you have to do. Who would be best to operate that
training and authorize and accredit
commissioners?
We've suggested in our submission, sir, that it's an NZQA standard very similar
to what duty managers have to go through,
where the testing is delivered by multiple providers up
and down the country. But the
content is set by NZQA, so everyone's getting exactly the same
training delivered slightly differently.
And who pays for that at the moment?
Sorry?
Who's writing out the check at the moment?
I think it's where the training is done.
It's primarily councils through the licensing fee, sir.
Right. Okay. Interesting. We'll get your view on that. Okay. Right.
Sorry.
You obviously had a lot of recommendations. Right.
Any other questions from any other members?
No, I think we're exhausted. Hey, thank you for your time, both of you.
Good to see you both, and thanks for a very
comprehensive submission.
Thank you for your time.
Thanks for your time.
Right. Members, we're going to go back into private session, so I'll see
you in a couple of minutes.